{"subject": "hep-th", "raw_no_of_entries": 21, "date": "09092022", "datef": "Fri 09 Sep 2022", "cur_entry_no": 22, "filtered_no_of_entries": 21}

2209.03361
New Supersymmetric String Theories from Discrete Theta Angles
Miguel Montero,Hector Parra de Freitas
We describe three previously unnoticed components of the moduli space of minimally supersymmetric string theories in $d\geq 7$, describing in some detail their spectrum and duality properties. We find a new component in nine and eight dimensions, and two additional ones in seven dimensions. These theories were originally discovered in a bottom-up classification of possible F/M-theory singularity freezing patterns in the K3 lattice, described in a companion paper. The 9d/8d component can be understood as F/M-theory on a twisted fibration of the Klein bottle over a circle, while the new seven-dimensional components are described as IIB on Bieberbach manifolds with a duality bundle and RR-NSNS backgrounds turned on. All the new components can be obtained from previously known theories by turning on certain discrete theta angles; however, the spectrum of massive objects is very different, and most strikingly, they feature an incomplete lattice of BPS strings, showing that string BPS completeness is not true in general even with sixteen supercharges. In all cases we find non-BPS representatives for each value of the charge, so the Completeness Principle is satisfied. We also analyze analogous theta angles in nonsupersymmetric string theories, and provide a detailed explanation of why the Type I discrete $\theta$ angle proposed in 1304.1551 is unphysical, using this to clarify certain non-perturbative phenomena in $O8$ planes.

2209.03370
From Symmetries to Commutant Algebras in Standard Hamiltonians - (cross-listed cond-mat.str-el)
Sanjay Moudgalya,Olexei I. Motrunich
In this work, we revisit several families of standard Hamiltonians that appear in the literature and discuss their symmetries and conserved quantities in the language of commutant algebras. In particular, we start with families of Hamiltonians defined by parts that are local, and study the algebra of operators that separately commute with each part. The families of models we discuss include the spin-1/2 Heisenberg model and its deformations, several types of spinless and spinful free-fermion models, and the Hubbard model. This language enables a decomposition of the Hilbert space into dynamically disconnected sectors that reduce to the conventional quantum number sectors for regular symmetries. In addition, we find examples of non-standard conserved quantities even in some simple cases, which demonstrates the need to enlarge the usual definitions of symmetries and conserved quantities. In the case of free-fermion models, this decomposition is related to the decompositions of Hilbert space via irreducible representations of certain Lie groups proposed in earlier works, while the algebra perspective applies more broadly, in particular also to arbitrary interacting models. Further, the von Neumann Double Commutant Theorem (DCT) enables a systematic construction of local operators with a given symmetry or commutant algebra, potentially eliminating the need for "brute-force" numerical searches carried out in the literature, and we show examples of such applications of the DCT. This paper paves the way for both systematic construction of families of models with exact scars and characterization of such families in terms of non-standard symmetries, pursued in a parallel paper.

2209.03369
Dressed vs. Pairwise States, and the Geometric Phase of Monopoles and Charges
Csaba Csáki,Zi-Yu Dong,Ofri Telem,John Terning,Shimon Yankielowicz
We construct the Faddeev-Kulish dressed multiparticle states of electrically and magnetically charged particles, incorporating the effects of real and virtual soft photons. We calculate the properties of such dressed states under Lorentz transformations, and find that they can be identified with the pairwise multi-particle states that transform under the pairwise little group. The shifts in the dressing factors under Lorentz transformations are finite and have a simple geometric interpretation. Using the transformation properties of the dressed states we also present a novel, fully quantum field theoretic derivation of the geometric (Berry) phase obtained by an adiabatic rotation of the Dirac string, and also of the Dirac quantization condition. For half integer pairwise helcity, we show that these multiparticle states have flipped spin-statistics, reproducing the surprising fact that fermions can be made out of bosons.

2209.03373
Majorana versus Dirac Constraints on the Neutrino Dipole Moments - (cross-listed hep-ph)
André de Gouvêa,Giancarlo Jusino Sánchez,Pedro A. N. Machado,Zahra Tabrizi
Massive neutrinos are guaranteed to have nonzero electromagnetic moments and, since there are at least three neutrino species, these dipole moments define a matrix. Here, we estimate the current upper bounds on all independent neutrino electromagnetic moments, concentrating on Earth-bound experiments and measurements with solar neutrinos, including the very recent results reported by XENONnT. We make no simplifying assumptions and compare the hypotheses that neutrinos are Majorana fermions or Dirac fermions. In particular, we fully explore constraints in the Dirac-neutrino parameter space. Majorana and Dirac neutrinos are different; for example, the upper bounds on the magnitudes of the elements of the dipole moment matrix are weaker for Dirac neutrinos, relative to Majorana neutrinos. The potential physics reach of next-generation experiments also depends on the nature of the neutrino. We find that a next-generation experiment two orders of magnitude more sensitive to the neutrino electromagnetic moments via $\nu_{\mu}$ elastic scattering may discover that the neutrino electromagnetic moments are nonzero if the neutrinos are Dirac fermions. Instead, if the neutrinos are Majorana fermions, such a discovery is ruled out by existing solar neutrino data, unless there are more than three light neutrinos.

2209.03372
Circuit Complexity in an interacting quenched Quantum Field Theory
Sayantan Choudhury,Rakshit Mandish Gharat,Saptarshi Mandal,Nilesh Pandey
In this work, we explore the effects of a quantum quench on the circuit complexity for a quenched quantum field theory having weakly coupled quartic interaction. We use the invariant operator method, under a perturbative framework, for computing the ground state of this system. We give the analytical expressions for specific reference and target states using the ground state of the system. Using a particular cost functional, we show the analytical computation of circuit complexity for the quenched and interacting field theory. Further, we give a numerical estimate of circuit complexity with respect to the quench rate, $\delta t$ for two coupled oscillators. The parametric variation of the unambiguous contribution of the circuit complexity for an arbitrary number of oscillators has been studied with respect to the dimensionless parameter $(t/\delta t$). We comment on the variation of circuit complexity for different values of coupling strength, different number of oscillators, and even in different dimensions.

2209.03422
Scattering wave functions for Aharonov-Bohm-Coulomb field: Path integral treatment
Nadira Boudiaf,Abdeldjalil Merdaci,Lyazid Chetouani
Exact Green's functions related to Dirac particle submitted to the combination of Aharonov-Bohm and Coulomb fields in (2+1) coordinate space are analytically calculated via path integral formalism in both global and local representations. The scattering normalized wavefunctions as well as the corresponding continuous energy eigenvalues are extracted following this approach. The interesting properties of the spinors are thus deduced after symmetrization. According to the symmetric form for the Green's function, it is shown that the equivalence with Dirac equation is undertaken with much ease. Some particular cases are also considered.

2209.03451
New Supersymmetric String Moduli Spaces from Frozen Singularities
Héctor Parra De Freitas
The current classification of $\mathcal{N} = 1$ string theories in eight and seven dimensions is completely captured by K3 surfaces with F-Theory or M-Theory frozen singularities. In this note we show that there are inequivalent ways of freezing certain collections of singularities which have the same ADE type, and so there are more connected components in the moduli space than previously thought; namely, one more in eight dimensions and three more in seven dimensions. We argue that the new component in eight dimensions decompactifies to a string theory in nine dimensions with rank 1 gauge group, which has been so far unidentified. Constructing and studying the stringy descriptions corresponding to these moduli spaces is the subject of a companion paper.

2209.04348
Interaction of divergence-free deceleration parameter in Weyl-type $f(Q,T)$ gravity - (cross-listed gr-qc)
Gaurav N. Gadbail,Simran Arora,Praveen Kumar,P. K. Sahoo
We study an extension of symmetric teleparallel gravity i.e. Weyl-type $f(Q,T)$ gravity and the divergence-free parametrization of the deceleration parameter $q(z) = q_{0}+q_{1}\frac{z(1+z)}{1+z^2}$ ($q_{0}$ and $q_{1}$ are free constants) to explore the evolution of the universe. By considering the above parametric form of $q$, we derive the Hubble solution and further impose it in the Friedmann equations of Weyl-type $f(Q, T)$ gravity. To see whether this model can challenge the $\Lambda$CDM limits, we computed the constraints on the model parameters using the Bayesian analysis for the Observational Hubble data ($OHD$) and the Pantheon sample ($SNe\,Ia$). Furthermore, the deceleration parameter depicts the accelerating behavior of the universe with the present value $q_0$ and the transition redshift $z_t$ (at which the expansion transits from deceleration to acceleration) with $1-\sigma$ and $2-\sigma$ confidence level. We also examine the evolution of the energy density, pressure, and effective equation of state parameters. Finally, we demonstrate that the divergence-free parametric form of the deceleration parameter is consistent with the Weyl-type $f(Q,T)$ gravity.

2209.03959
Anisotropic Universe in f(Q) gravity with Hybrid expansion - (cross-listed gr-qc)
L. Anjana Devi,S. Surendra Singh,Leishingam Kumrah,Md Khurshid Alam
Despite having a reasonably successful account of accelerated cosmology, understanding the early evolution of Universe has always been difficult for mankind. Our promising strategy is based on a novel class of symmetric teleparallel theories of gravity called $f(Q)$, in which the gravitational interaction is caused by the non-metricity scalar $Q$, which may help to solve some problems. We consider the locally rotationally symmetric (LRS) Bianchi type-I spacetime cosmological models and derive the motion of equations to study the early evolution of the cosmos. By assuming the Hybrid Expansion Law (HEL) for the average scale factor, we are able to determine the solutions to the field equations of Bianchi type-I spacetime. We discuss the energy density profile, the equation of state, and the skewness parameter and conclude that our models preserve anisotropic spatial geometry during the early stages of the Universe with the possibility of an anisotropic fluid present. However, as time goes on, even in the presence of an anisotropic fluid, the Universe may move towards isotropy due to inflation while the anisotropy of the fluid dims away at the same time. It is seen from the squared speed of sound that Universe shows phantom nature at the beginning then approaches to dark energy at present epoch. We analyze both geometrical and physical behaviors of the derived model.

2209.03608
Relations between Reshetikhin--Turaev and re-normalized link invariants - (cross-listed math.GT)
Akihito Mori
Costantino--Geer--Patureau-Mirand proved relations between the Reshetikhin--Turaev link invariants and the re-normalized link invariants for knots. Their theorem says that residues of the re-normalized link invariants are given by the Reshetikhin--Turaev link invariants. However, in the case of links, the residues are vanish, so we can not obtain any relations from the residues. In this paper, we prove that the Reshetikhin--Turaev link invariants appear in higher order terms of the re-normalized link invariants for links which are plumbed.

2209.03610
Tunneling of Bell Particles, Page Curve and Black Hole Information
Chong-Sun Chu,Rong-Xin Miao
We propose that the quantum states of black hole responsible for the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy are given by a thin shell of Bell particles located at the region just underneath the horizon. We argue that the configuration can be stabilized by a new kind of degeneracy pressure which is suggested by noncommutative geometry. We utilize the work of Parikh and Wilczek to include the effect of tunneling on the Bell particles. We show that partially tunneled Bell particles give the Page curve for the Hawking radiation, and the entirety of information initially stored in the black hole is returned to the outside via the Hawking radiation. In view of entropic force, the location of these Bell states is naturally related to the island and the quantum extremal surface. Also, the thin shell of Bell particles may be interpreted as a firewall.

2209.04433
Regular black holes in three dimensions and the zero point length - (cross-listed gr-qc)
Kimet Jusufi
In this paper, by means of regularisation procedure via $r\to \sqrt{r^2+l_0^2}$ (where $l_0$ can play the role of zero point length), we first modify the gravitational and electromagnetic potentials in two dimensions and then we solve the Einstein field equations to end up with an exact and regular black hole solution in three dimensions with a negative cosmological constant. We show that, the black hole solution is asymptotically AdS, non-singular at the origin and, under specific conditions, it has a flat de Sitter core at the origin. As a special case, we obtain the charged Banados-Teitelboim-Zanelli (BTZ) solution. Finally, using a dimensional continuation and the NJ algorithm, we end up with a legitimate rotating black hole solution in three dimensions.

2209.03650
Leading Quantum Correction to the $Φ^4$ Kink Form Factor
Hengyuan Guo
Recently, Jarah has constructed the kink form factor relevant to the scattering of an ultrarelativistic meson with an arbitrary nonrelativistic scalar kink. However the formula was only applied to the Sine-Gordon model, where the form factor was long ago determined by Weisz using integrability. In this paper, using various known analytic results for the (1+1)-dimensional real scalar $\Phi^4$ model and a kink wave packet construction, we analytically calculate the leading quantum correction to the form factor of the $\Phi^4$ kink. We discuss its properties in general and also in the ultra-relativistic meson case and provide a numerical check of our results.

2209.03678
Gauge-invariant models of interacting fields with spins 3,1 and 0
P. M. Lavrov
New local gauge-invariant models of interacting fields with spins 3, 1 and 0 are found. The construction of the models is completely based on the new approach to the deformation problem proposed in our papers (Buchbinder and Lavrov in JHEP 06: 097, 2021; Buchbinder and Lavrov in Eur. Phys. J. C 81:856, 2021; Lavrov in Eur. Phys. J. C 82:429, 2022). The approach allows to describe the deformation procedure for theories with gauge freedom in an explicit and closed form in terms of special anticanonical transformations of the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism. The action of the models appears as a local part of the deformed action which is represented by a functional of the fourth order in fields. This functional is invariant under original gauge transformations.

2209.03774
Noncommutative gauge and gravity theories and geometric Seiberg-Witten map
Paolo Aschieri,Leonardo Castellani
We give a pedagogical account of noncommutative gauge and gravity theories, where the exterior product between forms is deformed into a $\star$-product via an abelian twist (e.g. the Groenewold-Moyal twist). The Seiberg-Witten map between commutative and noncommutative gauge theories is introduced. It allows to express the action of noncommutative Einstein gravity coupled to spinor fields in terms of the usual commutative action with commutative fields plus extra interaction terms dependent on the noncommutativity parameter.

2209.03822
Topological Quantum Computation on Supersymmetric Spin Chains - (cross-listed quant-ph)
Indrajit Jana,Filippo Montorsi,Pramod Padmanabhan,Diego Trancanelli
Quantum gates built out of braid group elements form the building blocks of topological quantum computation. They have been extensively studied in $SU(2)_k$ quantum group theories, a rich source of examples of non-Abelian anyons such as the Ising ($k=2$), Fibonacci ($k=3$) and Jones-Kauffman ($k=4$) anyons. We show that the fusion spaces of these anyonic systems can be precisely mapped to the product state zero modes of certain Nicolai-like supersymmetric spin chains. As a result, we can realize the braid group on the product state zero modes of these supersymmetric systems. These operators kill all the other states in the Hilbert space, thus preventing the occurrence of errors while processing information, making them suitable for quantum computing.

2209.03828
't Hooft anomalies for staggered fermions - (cross-listed hep-lat)
Simon Catterall
We show that staggered fermion theories exhibit exact 't Hooft anomalies that constrain their IR dynamics. These anomalies arise when staggered fermions are coupled to gravity which can be accomplished by replacing them by discrete K\"{a}hler-Dirac fermions. We first show the existence of a perturbative anomaly in even dimensions which breaks an exact $U(1)$ symmetry to $Z_4$. We then show there is a further mixed non-perturbative 't Hooft anomaly between this $Z_4$ and a reflection symmetry. One can cancel this anomaly if the theory contains multiples of two staggered fields. In flat space such a theory yields a continuum limit with eight Dirac or sixteen Majorana fermions which agrees with results from topological superconductors and the cancellation of spin-$Z_4$ anomalies of Weyl fermions. 't Hooft anomaly cancellation is a necessary requirement for symmetric mass generation and this result gives a theoretical explanation of recent numerical work on the phase diagram of interacting staggered fermions. As an application of these ideas we construct a lattice model whose low energy continuum limit is conjectured to yield the Pati-Salam GUT model.

2209.03884
Holographic Floquet states in low dimensions (II)
Martí Berenguer,Ana Garbayo,Javier Mas,Alfonso V. Ramallo
We continue the study in [1] of a strongly coupled (2+1)-dimensional gauge theory subject to an external rotating electric field. The system is modelled holographically as a D3/D5 probe intersection. We add temperature to the D3 background and analyze the phase diagram. Also here, the conductive phase extends down to vanishing external electric field at discrete values of the frequencies where vector meson Floquet condensates form. For all temperatures, at given intercalated frequencies, we find new dual states that we name Floquet suppression points, where the vacuum polarization vanishes even in the presence of an electric field. From the data we infer that these states exist both in the conductive and insulating phases. In the massless limit we find a linear and instantaneous conductivity law, recovering known general results in 2+1 dimensions. We also examine the photovoltaic AC and DC current as the response to an oscillating probe electric field and see that rising the temperature suppresses the photovoltaic Hall current. All the results obtained carry over qualitatively unaltered to the case of D3/D7.

2209.03921
A Three-Parameter Elliptic Double-Box
Alex Chaparro Pozo,Matt von Hippel
We express a toy model of the ten-point elliptic double-box, first characterized in arXiv:1712.02785, in terms of elliptic polylogarithms. This toy model corresponds to a particular unphysical limit of the elliptic double-box in which it depends on only three dual conformal cross-ratios. While the diagram is fully permutation symmetric in the cross-ratios in this limit, this property is not manifest in either of the two elliptic polylogarithm formalisms we use to express it. We observe that the function is a pure elliptic polylogarithm, which is the result of nontrivial identities between elliptic integrals depending on the conformal cross-ratios.

2209.03922
A Symbol and Coaction for Higher-Loop Sunrise Integrals
Andreas Forum,Matt von Hippel
We construct a symbol and coaction for $l$-loop sunrise integrals, both for the equal-mass and generic-mass cases. These constitute the first concrete examples of symbols and coactions for integrals involving Calabi-Yau threefolds and higher. In order to achieve a symbol of finite length, we recast the differential equations satisfied by the master integrals of this topology in the form of a unipotent differential equation. We augment the basis of master integrals in a natural way by including ratios of maximal cuts $\tau_i$. We discuss the relationship of this construction to constructions of symbols and coactions for multiple polylogarithms and elliptic multiple polylogarithms, in particular its connection to notions of transcendental weight.

2209.03928
Hemispherical asymmetry of primordial power spectra - (cross-listed gr-qc)
K. Sravan Kumar,João Marto
Although the cosmic microwave background (CMB) is largely understood to be homogeneous and isotropic, the hemispherical asymmetry anomaly seems to breakdown the isotropy, since the difference between the power spectrum in the two hemispheres of the CMB is of the order of $10^{-2}$ at large angular scales. We argue that the existence of an anisotropic power spectrum can simply be explained by considering the existence of two distinct power spectra in the two hemispheres of the CMB. We achieve this by proposing a double vacuum structure for (single field) inflationary quantum fluctuations based on discrete spacetime transformations ($\mathcal{P}\mathcal{T}$) in a gravitational context, first in de Sitter and finally in quasi de Sitter. As a result we obtain inflationary quantum fluctuations that are produced in pairs with which we are able to reproduce the amplitude of the observed dipolar asymmetry at different scales of $ 10^{-4} {\rm Mpc^{-1}}\lesssim k\lesssim 1 {\rm Mpc^{-1}}$ fixing the pivot scale $k=0.05 \, {\rm Mpc}^{-1}$ for $N=55$ e-foldings of inflation. We also predict that a similar hemispherical asymmetry should arise for the primordial gravitational waves (PGWs) as well and we compute the power asymmetry of PGW spectra at various wave numbers. In our framework we do not introduce any new parameters.