{"subject": "hep-th", "raw_no_of_entries": 13, "date": "12092022", "datef": "Mon 12 Sep 2022", "cur_entry_no": 14, "filtered_no_of_entries": 13}

2209.03959
Anisotropic Universe in f(Q) gravity with Hybrid expansion - (cross-listed gr-qc)
L. Anjana Devi,S. Surendra Singh,Leishingam Kumrah,Md Khurshid Alam
Despite having a reasonably successful account of accelerated cosmology, understanding the early evolution of Universe has always been difficult for mankind. Our promising strategy is based on a novel class of symmetric teleparallel theories of gravity called $f(Q)$, in which the gravitational interaction is caused by the non-metricity scalar $Q$, which may help to solve some problems. We consider the locally rotationally symmetric (LRS) Bianchi type-I spacetime cosmological models and derive the motion of equations to study the early evolution of the cosmos. By assuming the Hybrid Expansion Law (HEL) for the average scale factor, we are able to determine the solutions to the field equations of Bianchi type-I spacetime. We discuss the energy density profile, the equation of state, and the skewness parameter and conclude that our models preserve anisotropic spatial geometry during the early stages of the Universe with the possibility of an anisotropic fluid present. However, as time goes on, even in the presence of an anisotropic fluid, the Universe may move towards isotropy due to inflation while the anisotropy of the fluid dims away at the same time. It is seen from the squared speed of sound that Universe shows phantom nature at the beginning then approaches to dark energy at present epoch. We analyze both geometrical and physical behaviors of the derived model.

2209.03969
Quantum discord and steering in top quarks at the LHC - (cross-listed quant-ph)
Yoav Afik,Juan Ramón Muñoz de Nova
Top quarks have been recently shown to be a promising system to study quantum information problems at the highest-energy scale available. The current lines of research mostly discuss topics such as entanglement, Bell nonlocality or quantum tomography. Here, we provide the full picture of quantum correlations with top quarks by studying also quantum discord and steering. We find that both phenomena are present at the LHC. In particular, quantum discord in a separable quantum state is expected to be detected with high-statistical significance. Interestingly, due to the singular nature of the measurement process, quantum discord can be measured following its original definition, and the steering ellipsoid can be experimentally reconstructed, both highly-demanding measurements in conventional setups. In contrast to entanglement, the asymmetric nature of quantum discord and steering can provide witnesses of new physics beyond the Standard Model.

2209.03978
Positivity, low twist dominance and CSDR for CFTs
Agnese Bissi,Aninda Sinha
We consider a crossing symmetric dispersion relation (CSDR) for CFT four point correlation with identical scalar operators, which is manifestly symmetric under the cross-ratios $u,v$ interchange. This representation has several features in common with the CSDR for quantum field theories. It enables a study of the expansion of the correlation function around $u=v=1/4$, which is used in the numerical conformal bootstrap program. We elucidate several remarkable features of the dispersive representation using the four point correlation function of $\Phi_{1,2}$ operators in 2d minimal models as a test-bed. When the dimension of the external scalar operator ($\Delta_\sigma$) is less than $\frac{1}{2}$, the CSDR gets contribution from only a single tower of global primary operators with the second tower being projected out. We find that there is a notion of low twist dominance (LTD) which, as a function of $\Delta_\sigma$, is maximized near the 2d Ising model as well as the non-unitary Yang-Lee model. The CSDR and LTD further explain positivity of the Taylor expansion coefficients of the correlation function around the crossing symmetric point and lead to universal predictions for specific ratios of these coefficients. These results carry over to the epsilon expansion in $4-\epsilon$ dimensions. We also conduct a preliminary investigation of geometric function theory ideas, namely the Bieberbach-Rogosinski bounds.

2209.03979
Emergent classical gauge symmetry from quantum entanglement
Josh Kirklin
We describe explicitly how entanglement between quantum mechanical subsystems can lead to emergent gauge symmetry in a classical limit. We first provide a precise characterisation of when it is consistent to treat a quantum subsystem classically in such a limit, namely: in any quantum state corresponding to a definite classical state in the classical limit, the reduced density matrix of the subsystem must be approximately proportional to a projection operator, and the projection operators for different classical subsystem states must obey an approximate mutual orthogonality condition. These are strong constraints on the entanglement structure of classical states. They generically give rise to fundamentally non-local classical degrees of freedom, which may nevertheless be accounted for using a completely local kinematical description, if one gauges this description in the right way. The mechanism we describe is very general, but for concreteness we exhibit a toy example involving three entangled spins at high angular momentum, and we also describe a significant group-theoretic generalisation of this toy example. Finally, we give evidence that this phenomenon plays a role in the emergence of bulk diffeomorphism invariance in gravity.

2209.03981
Dualization of Higher Derivative Heterotic Supergravities in $6D$ and $10D$
Hao-Yuan Chang,Ergin Sezgin,Yoshiaki Tanii
There exist two four-derivative extensions of $N=(1,0)$ supergravity in six dimensions. A particular combination of them is known to dualize to the analog of the the Bergshoeff-de Roo (BdR) action in $10D$. Here we first show that the two extensions are not related to each other by any field redefinitions. Next, we dualize them separately thereby obtaining a two parameter dual theory. This is done directly at the level of the action, thus avoiding the laborious method of integrating equations of motion of the dualized theory into an action. To explore whether a similar phenomenon exists in $10D$, we study the dualization of the BdR action in $10D$ in detail. We find an obstacle in the separation of the result into a sum of two independent invariants because of the presence of terms which do not lift from $6D$ to $10D$. We also compare the dual of the BdR action with an existing result obtained in superspace. We find that the bosonic actions agree modulo field redefinitions.

2209.04283
Strange correlators for topological quantum systems from bulk-boundary correspondence - (cross-listed cond-mat.str-el)
Luca Lepori,Michele Burrello,Andrea Trombettoni,Simone Paganelli
"Strange" correlators provide a tool to detect topological phases arising in many-body models by computing the matrix elements of suitably defined two-point correlations between the states under investigation and trivial reference states. Their effectiveness depends on the choice of the adopted operators. In this paper we give a systematic procedure for this choice, discussing the advantages of choosing operators using the bulk-boundary correspondence of the systems under scrutiny. Via the scaling exponents, we directly relate the algebraic decay of the strange correlators with the scaling dimensions of gapless edge modes operators. We begin our analysis with lattice models hosting symmetry-protected topological phases and we analyze the sums of the strange correlators, pointing out that integrating their moduli substantially reduces cancellations and finite-size effects. We also analyze instances of systems hosting intrinsic topological order, as well as strange correlators between states with different nontrivial topologies. Our results for both translational and non-translational invariant cases, and in presence of on-site disorder and long-range couplings, extend the validity of the strange correlators approach for the diagnosis of topological phases of matter, and indicate a general procedure for their optimal choice.

2209.04296
Pole-skipping of Holographic Correlators: Aspects of Gauge Symmetry and Generalizations
Yuan-Tai Wang,Wen-Bin Pan
In the framework of anti-de Sitter space/conformal field theory (AdS/CFT), we study the pole-skipping phenomenon of the holographic correlators of boundary operators. We explore the locations of the pole-skipping points case by case with the models of $U(1)$-gauged form fields propagating in the asymptotic AdS bulk of finite temperature. In general, in different cases all the first-order points are located at the Matsubara frequency with corresponding wave vectors regularly dispersed in the momentum space. Specifically, in the massless cases with $U(1)$ symmetry, the wave vectors of the pole-skipping points have a form-number dependence, and a trans-mode equivalence in the dual fields is found in correspondence with electromagnetic duality. In the massive cases with explicit symmetry breaking, the points degenerate to be independent of the form number. We expect in such kind of pole-skipping properties implications of distinctive physics in the chaotic systems. Our near-horizon computation is verified with the double-trace method especially in the example of 2-form where there is dimension-dependent boundary divergence. We illustrate in these cases that the pole-skipping properties of the holographic correlators are determined by the IR physics, consistent with the ordinary cases in previous studies.

2209.04297
Phase transitions in TGFT: a Landau-Ginzburg analysis of Lorentzian quantum geometric models - (cross-listed gr-qc)
Luca Marchetti,Daniele Oriti,Andreas G. A. Pithis,Johannes Thürigen
In the tensorial group field theory (TGFT) approach to quantum gravity, the basic quanta of the theory correspond to discrete building blocks of geometry. It is expected that their collective dynamics gives rise to continuum spacetime at a coarse grained level, via a process involving a phase transition. In this work we show for the first time how phase transitions for realistic TGFT models can be realized using Landau-Ginzburg mean-field theory. More precisely, we consider models generating 4-dimensional Lorentzian triangulations formed by spacelike tetrahedra whose quantum geometry is encoded in non-local degrees of freedom on the non-compact group $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{C})$ and subject to gauge and simplicity constraints. Further we include $\mathbb{R}$-valued variables which may be interpreted as discretized scalar fields typically employed as a matter reference frame. We apply the Ginzburg criterion finding that fluctuations around the non-vanishing mean-field vacuum remain small at large correlation lengths regardless of the combinatorics of the non-local interaction validating the mean-field theory description of the phase transition. This work represents a first crucial step to understand phase transitions in compelling TGFT models for quantum gravity and paves the way for a more complete analysis via functional renormalization group techniques. Moreover, it supports the recent extraction of effective cosmological dynamics from TGFTs in the context of a mean-field approximation.

2209.04298
Snowmass 2021 topical group report: Neutrinos from Natural Sources - (cross-listed hep-ph)
Yusuke Koshio,Gabriel D. Orebi Gann,Erin O'Sullivan,Irene Tamborra
This is the final report from the Snowmass 2021 Neutrino Frontier Topical Group on Neutrinos from Natural Sources. It covers a broad range of neutrino sources, from low-energy neutrinos from the early universe to ultra high-energy sources. We divide this report by source, and discuss the motivations for pursuing searches in each case, the current state of the field, and the prospects for future theoretical and experimental developments. We consider neutrinos produced in the early universe; solar neutrinos; geoneutrinos; supernova neutrinos, including the diffuse supernova neutrino background (DSNB); neutrinos produced in the atmosphere; and high-energy astrophysical neutrinos.

2209.04348
Interaction of divergence-free deceleration parameter in Weyl-type $f(Q,T)$ gravity - (cross-listed gr-qc)
Gaurav N. Gadbail,Simran Arora,Praveen Kumar,P.K. Sahoo
We study an extension of symmetric teleparallel gravity i.e. Weyl-type $f(Q,T)$ gravity and the divergence-free parametrization of the deceleration parameter $q(z) = q_{0}+q_{1}\frac{z(1+z)}{1+z^2}$ ($q_{0}$ and $q_{1}$ are free constants) to explore the evolution of the universe. By considering the above parametric form of $q$, we derive the Hubble solution and further impose it in the Friedmann equations of Weyl-type $f(Q, T)$ gravity. To see whether this model can challenge the $\Lambda$CDM limits, we computed the constraints on the model parameters using the Bayesian analysis for the Observational Hubble data ($OHD$) and the Pantheon sample ($SNe\,Ia$). Furthermore, the deceleration parameter depicts the accelerating behavior of the universe with the present value $q_0$ and the transition redshift $z_t$ (at which the expansion transits from deceleration to acceleration) with $1-\sigma$ and $2-\sigma$ confidence level. We also examine the evolution of the energy density, pressure, and effective equation of state parameters. Finally, we demonstrate that the divergence-free parametric form of the deceleration parameter is consistent with the Weyl-type $f(Q,T)$ gravity.

2209.04350
Theory and phenomenology of relativistic corrections to the Heisenberg principle
Giovanni Amelino-Camelia,Valerio Astuti
The Heisenberg position-momentum uncertainty principle shares with the equivalence principle the role of main pillar of our current description of nature. However, in its original formulation it is inconsistent with special relativity, and in nearly a century of investigation not much progress has been made toward a satisfactory reformulation. Some partial insight has been gained in the ultra-high-velocity regime but a full description is still missing and in particular we have no clue about the intermediate regime of particles whose speeds are much smaller than the speed of light but still high enough for tangible departures from the Heisenberg formulation to be present. As we stress here, that intermediate regime is also our best chance for testing experimentally our understanding of the implications of special relativity for the uncertainty principle. We here introduce a new approach to these challenges, based mainly on the observation that the only operative notion of position of a particle at a given time involves the crossing of the worldline of that particle with the worldline of a test particle. We find that the worldline-crossing perspective opens a path toward a special-relativistic version of the uncertainty principle, which indeed could be tested experimentally.

2209.04396
Supersymmetric Kundt four manifolds and their spinorial evolution flows - (cross-listed math.DG)
Ángel Murcia,C. S. Shahbazi
We investigate the differential geometry and topology of four-dimensional Lorentzian manifolds $(M,g)$ equipped with a real Killing spinor $\varepsilon$, where $\varepsilon$ is defined as a section of a bundle of irreducible real Clifford modules satisfying the Killing spinor equation with non-zero real constant. Such triples $(M,g,\varepsilon)$ are precisely the supersymmetric configurations of minimal four-dimensional supergravity and necessarily belong to the class Kundt of space-times, hence we refer to them as supersymmetric Kundt configurations. We characterize a class of Lorentzian metrics on $\mathbb{R}^2\times X$, where $X$ is a two-dimensional oriented manifold, to which every supersymmetric Kundt configuration is locally isometric, proving that $X$ must be an elementary hyperbolic Riemann surface when equipped with the natural induced metric. This yields a class of space-times that vastly generalize the Siklos class of space-times describing gravitational waves in AdS$_4$. Furthermore, we study the Cauchy problem posed by a real Killing spinor and we prove that the corresponding evolution problem is equivalent to a system of differential flow equations, the real Killing spinorial flow equations, for a family of functions and coframes on any Cauchy hypersurface $\Sigma\subset M$. Using this formulation, we prove that the evolution flow defined by a real Killing spinor preserves the Hamiltonian and momentum constraints of the Einstein equation with negative curvature and is therefore compatible with the latter. Moreover, we explicitly construct all left-invariant evolution flows defined by a Killing spinor on a simply connected three-dimensional Lie group, classifying along the way all solutions to the corresponding constraint equations, some of which also satisfy the constraint equations associated to the Einstein condition.

2209.04433
Regular black holes in three dimensions and the zero point length - (cross-listed gr-qc)
Kimet Jusufi
In this paper, by means of regularisation procedure via $r\to \sqrt{r^2+l_0^2}$ (where $l_0$ can play the role of zero point length), we first modify the gravitational and electromagnetic potentials in two dimensions and then we solve the Einstein field equations to end up with an exact and regular black hole solution in three dimensions with a negative cosmological constant. We show that, the black hole solution is asymptotically AdS, non-singular at the origin and, under specific conditions, it has a flat de Sitter core at the origin. As a special case, we obtain the charged Banados-Teitelboim-Zanelli (BTZ) solution. Finally, using a dimensional continuation and the NJ algorithm, we end up with a legitimate rotating black hole solution in three dimensions.