

2207.13719
Celestial holography on Kerr-Schild backgrounds
Riccardo Gonzo, Tristan McLoughlin and Andrea Puhm
We explore the celestial holography proposal for non-trivial asymptotically flat backgrounds including the Coulomb field of a static and spinning point charge, their gravitational counterparts described by the Schwarzschild and Kerr metrics, as well as the Aichelburg-Sexl shockwave and spinning shockwave geometries and their electromagnetic cousins. We compute celestial two-point amplitudes on these Kerr-Schild type backgrounds which have the desirable feature, due to the presence of an external source, that they are non-vanishing for general operator positions and are not constrained by the kinematic delta functions of flat space celestial CFT correlators. Of particular interest is the case of shockwave backgrounds where the two-point scattering amplitude of massless scalars can be interpreted as a standard CFT three-point correlator between two massless asymptotic states and a conformal primary shockwave operator. We furthermore show that the boundary on-shell action for general backgrounds becomes the generating functional for tree-level correlation functions in celestial CFT. Finally, we derive (conformal) Faddeev-Kulish dressings for particle-like backgrounds which remove all infrared divergent terms in the two-point functions to all orders in perturbation theory.

2207.13721
Moduli stabilization in type IIB orientifolds at $h^{2,1}=50$
Konstantinos Tsagkaris and Erik Plauschinn
We study moduli stabilization in Calabi-Yau orientifold compactifications of type IIB string theory with O3- and O7-planes. We consider a Calabi-Yau three-fold with Hodge number $h^{2,1}=50$ and stabilize all axio-dilaton and complex-structure moduli by three-form fluxes. This is a challenging task, especially for large moduli-space dimensions. To address this question we develop an algorithm to generate $9.2\cdot 10^4$ flux vacua with small flux number $N_{\rm flux}$. Based on recent results by Crin\`o et al.~we estimate the bound imposed by the tadpole-cancellation condition as $N_{\rm flux}\leq \mathcal O(10^3)$, however, the smallest flux number we obtain in our search is of order $N_{\rm flux}=\mathcal O(10^{4})$. This implies, in particular, that for all solutions in our data set the tadpole conjecture is satisfied.

2207.13726
Asymptotic symmetries and memories of gauge theories in FLRW spacetimes
Martin Enriquez-Rojo and Tobias Schroeder
In this paper, we investigate the asymptotic structure of gauge theories in decelerating and spatially flat Friedmann-Lema\^itre-Robertson-Walker universes. Firstly, we thoroughly explore the asymptotic symmetries of electrodynamics in this background, which reveals a major inconsistency already present in the flat case. Taking advantage of this treatment, we derive the associated memory effects, discussing their regime of validity and differences with respect to their flat counterparts. Next, we extend our analysis to non-Abelian Yang-Mills, coupling it dynamically and simultaneously to a Dirac spinor and a complex scalar field. Within this novel setting, we examine the (in-)compatibility of the covariant phase space formalism and the use of Poisson superbrackets.

2207.13750
Mapping Markov: On effective master equations for two accelerated qubits
Greg Kaplanek and Erickson Tjoa
We revisit the problem involving two constantly accelerating Unruh-DeWitt detectors using Open Effective Field Theory methods. We study the time evolution of the joint detector state using a Markovian approximation which differs from the standard one taken in the literature. We show that this Markovian limit already implies complete positivity of the dynamical evolution map without the rotating wave approximation (RWA), albeit in a narrower region of parameter space than normally considered. This shows that the standard microscopic derivation of the Gorini-Kossakowski-Sudarshan-Lindblad master equation (which usually invokes the RWA) is at best valid over a much smaller parameter space than what the Markovian regime allows for. We provide explicit validity bounds for when the Markovian approximation holds, which show that two well-known special cases studied in the literature, namely the "{stacked trajectory}" limit (when detector trajectories are taken to be on top of one another) and large gap-to-acceleration ratio violate the validity of Markovian approximation. We also show that Markovian dynamics without RWA can lead to rather different qualitative predictions for entanglement dynamics compared to RWA-based solutions, thus emphasizing further the need to track the regime of validity of all approximations.

2207.13786
Constraints and Interactions in Quantization of Yukawa Model with Higher Order Derivatives
Jan Żochowski
This work is dedicated to the quantization of the light-front Yukawa model in D=1+3 dimensions with higher order derivatives of the scalar field. The problem of the computing Dirac brackets and the (anti-) commutator algebra of interacting fields in the presence of the constraints is discussed. The Dirac method and the Ostrogradski formalism of the higher order derivatives are exploited. The systematic method of obtaining the inverse of the functional Dirac-Bergmann matrix with interactions and higher order derivatives is introduced in two variants. The discussion of applications and details of these two variants are conducted. The results of the quantization in the form of the (anti-) commutator algebra are presented and analyzed with special regard to the structure of the interactions for the light-front Yukawa model, which includes the higher order derivatives.

2207.13805
Squashed entanglement in one-dimensional quantum matter
Alfonso Maiellaro, Francesco Romeo, Roberta Citro and Fabrizio Illuminati
We introduce the concept of squashed entanglement between a system edges in one-dimensional quantum matter. We show that edge squashed entanglement discriminates unambiguously between topological insulators and topological superconductors by taking different quantized values, respectively to Bell-state entanglement and half Bell-state entanglement, depending on the statistics of the edge modes. Such topological squashed entanglement is robust under variations of the sample conditions due to disorder or local perturbations and scales exponentially with the system size, converging asymptotically to a quantized topological invariant also in the presence of interactions. By comparing it with the entanglement negativity, we show that topological squashed entanglement defines the natural measure of nonlocal correlation patterns in quantum matter. Finally, we discuss issues of experimental accessibility as well as possible generalizations to higher dimensions.

2207.13858
Heterotic global anomalies and torsion Witten index
Kazuya Yonekura
We study the structure of anomalies in general heterotic string theories by considering general 2-dimensional $\mathcal{N}=(0,1)$ supersymmetric quantum field theories (SQFTs), without assuming conformal invariance nor the correct central charges. First we generalize the precise notion of the $B$-field introduced by Witten. Then we express the target space anomalies by invariants of SQFTs. Perturbative anomalies correspond to the Witten index of some class of SQFTs, while global anomalies correspond to a torsion version of the Witten index. The torsion index gives some of the invariants of SQFTs suggested by topological modular forms, and is expected to be zero for the cases that are relevant to actual heterotic string theories.

2207.13933
Supersymmetry and R-symmetries in Wess-Zumino models: properties and model dataset construction
Zheng Sun
The Nelson-Seiberg theorem and its extensions relate supersymmetry breaking and R-symmetries in Wess-Zumino models. But their applicability may be limited by previously found non-generic counterexamples. Constructing a dataset of R-symmetric Wess-Zumino models is useful for studying the occurrence of such counterexamples as well as other purposes. This work gives a pedagogical review on the basics of supersymmetry in (3+1)-dimensions, Wess-Zumino models and their supergravity extensions, the Nelson-Seiberg theorem and its extensions. We present a preliminary construction of the dataset of R-symmetric Wess-Zumino models with up to 5 chiral fields. Among 925 models in total, 20 of them with non-generic R-charges are counterexamples to both the Nelson-Seiberg theorem and its extensions. Thus the dataset gives an estimation of the accuracy of the field counting method based on these theorems. More constructions and applications of the dataset are expected in future work.

2207.13983
The spectrum of a Gross-Neveu Yukawa model with flavor disorder in $d=3$
Shiroman Prakash
We study a variant of the Gross-Neveu-Yukawa model, containing $M$ real scalar fields and $N$ Dirac (or Majorana) fermions, interacting via a Yukawa interaction with a local Gaussian random coupling in three dimensions. In the limit where $M$ and $N$ are both large, and the ratio $M/N$ is held fixed, the model defines a line of infrared fixed points parameterized by $M/N$, reducing to the familiar large $N$ Gross-Neveu vector model when $M/N=0$. When $M/N$ is non-zero, the model is dominated by melonic diagrams and gives rise to SYK-like physics. We compute the spectrum of single-trace operators in the theory, and find that it is real for all values of $M/N$. We conclude that the model provides a real non-supersymmetric generalization of the SYK model to three-dimensions.

2207.13996
D-brane Superpotentials and Geometric Invariants in Complete Intersection Calabi-Yau Manifolds
Xuan Li, Yuan-Chun Jing and Fu-Zhong Yang
By blowing up the ambient space along the curve wrapped by B-branes, we study the brane superpotentials and Ooguri-Vafa invariants on complete intersections Calabi-Yau threefolds. On the topological B-model side, B-brane superpotentials are expressed in terms of the period integral of the blow-up manifolds. By mirror maps, the superpotentials are generating functions of Ooguri-Vafa invariants counting holomorphic disks on the topological A-model side.

2207.14015
S-folds and $AdS_{3}$ flows from the D3-brane
Adolfo Guarino and Minwoo Suh
We investigate supersymmetric flows in type IIB supergravity that preserve an $SO(2,2)$ space-time symmetry and asymptote to $AdS_{5} \times S^5$ at both endpoints. The flows are constructed as Janus-type $\mathbb{R} \times AdS_{3}$ BPS domain-walls in the effective four-dimensional $[SO(1,1)\times{S}O(6)]\ltimes\mathbb{R}^{12}$ gauged maximal supergravity describing the massless sector of type IIB supergravity compactified on $S^1 \times S^{5}$. The compactification includes an S-duality hyperbolic twist along the $S^1$ which, when combined with an appropriate choice of boundary conditions for the running scalars, generates special flows that develop an S-fold regime at their core, thus enhancing the space-time symmetry there to $SO(2,3)$. Via the AdS/CFT correspondence, the flows constructed here are conjectured to describe conformal interfaces in a circle compactification of $\mathcal{N}=4$ $\textrm{SYM}_{4}$.

2207.14055
Finite temperature charge and current densities around a cosmic string in AdS spacetime with compact dimension
E. R. Bezerra de Mello, W. Oliveira dos Santos and A. A. Saharian
For a massive scalar field with a general curvature coupling parameter, we investigate the finite temperature contributions to the Hadamard function and to the charge and current densities in the geometry of a magnetic flux carrying generalized cosmic string embedded in $(D+1)$-dimensional locally AdS spacetime with a compactified spatial dimension. For $D=4$, the geometry on the AdS boundary, in the context of the AdS/CFT duality, corresponds to a cosmic string as a linear defect, compactified along its axis. In contrast to the case of the Minkowski bulk, the upper bound on the chemical potential does not depend on the field mass and is completely determined by the length of compact dimension and by the enclosed magnetic flux. The only nonzero components correspond to the charge density, to the azimuthal current and to the current along the compact dimension. They are periodic functions of magnetic fluxes with the period equal to the flux quantum. The charge density is an odd function and the currents are even functions of the chemical potential. At high temperatures the influence of the gravitational field and topology on the charge density is subdominant and the leading term in the corresponding expansion coincides with that for the charge density in the Minkowski spacetime. The current densities are topology-induced quantities and their behavior at high temperatures is completely different with the linear dependence on the temperature. At small temperatures and for chemical potentials smaller than the critical value, the thermal expectation values are exponentially suppressed for both massive and massless fields.

2207.14076
Topological modularity of Monstrous Moonshine
Ying-Hsuan Lin
We explore connections among Monstrous Moonshine, orbifolds, the Kitaev chain, and topological modular forms. Symmetric orbifolds of the Monster CFT, together with further orbifolds by subgroups of Monster, are studied and found to satisfy the divisibility property, which was recently used to rule out extremal holomorphic conformal field theories. For orbifolds by cyclic subgroups of Monster, we arrive at divisibility properties involving the full McKay-Thompson series. Orbifolds by non-abelian subgroups of Monster are further considered by utilizing the data of Generalized Moonshine.

2207.14078
Dirac/Weyl-node-induced oscillating Casimir effect
Katsumasa Nakayama and Kei Suzuki
The Casimir effect is a quantum phenomenon induced by the zero-point energy of relativistic fields confined in a finite-size system. This effect for photon fields has been studied for a long time, while the realization of counterparts for fermion fields in Dirac/Weyl semimetals is an open question. We theoretically demonstrate the typical properties of the Casimir effect for relativistic electron fields in Dirac/Weyl semimetals and show the results from an effective Hamiltonian for realistic materials such as Cd$_3$As$_2$ and Na$_3$Bi. We find an oscillation of the Casimir energy as a function of the thickness of the thin film, which stems from the existence of Dirac/Weyl nodes in momentum space. Experimentally, such an effect can be observed in thin films of semimetals, where the thickness dependence of thermodynamic quantities is affected by the Casimir energy. Our findings will open a new area of engineering, that is, Casimir electronics and Casimir spintronics.

2207.14090
Complexity and quenches in models with three and four spin interactions
Mamta Gautam, Nitesh Jaiswal, Ankit Gill and Tapobrata Sarkar
We study information theoretic quantities in models with three and four spin interactions. These models show distinctive characteristics compared to their nearest neighbour counterparts. Here, we quantify these in terms of the Nielsen complexity in static and quench scenarios, the Fubini-Study complexity, and the entanglement entropy. The models that we study have a rich phase structure, and we show how the difference in the nature of phase transitions in these, compared to ones with nearest neighbour interactions, result in different behaviour of information theoretic quantities, from ones known in the literature. For example, the derivative of the Nielsen complexity does not diverge but shows a discontinuity near continuous phase transitions, and the Fubini-Study complexity may be regular and continuous across such transitions. The entanglement entropy shows a novel discontinuity both at first and second order quantum phase transitions. We also study multiple quench scenarios in these models and contrast these with quenches in the transverse XY model.

2207.14104
Homological Knot Invariants from Mirror Symmetry
Mina Aganagic
In 1999, Khovanov showed that a link invariant known as the Jones polynomial is the Euler characteristic of a homology theory. The knot categorification problem is to find a general construction of knot homology groups, and to explain their meaning -- what are they homologies of? </p> <p>Homological mirror symmetry, formulated by Kontsevich in 1994, naturally produces hosts of homological invariants. Typically though, it leads to invariants which have no particular interest outside of the problem at hand. </p> <p>I showed recently that there is a new family of mirror pairs of manifolds, for which homological mirror symmetry does lead to interesting invariants and solves the knot categorification problem. The resulting invariants are computable explicitly for any simple Lie algebra, and certain Lie superalgebras.

2207.14167
Magnetic Carrollian gravity from the Carroll algebra
Andrea Campoleoni, Marc Henneaux, Simon Pekar, Alfredo Pérez and Patricio Salgado-Rebolledo
We explicitly establish the equivalence between the magnetic Carrollian limit of Einstein gravity defined through the Hamiltonian formalism and the Carrollian theory of gravity defined through a gauging of the Carroll algebra along the lines of standard Poincar\'e (or (A)dS) gaugings.

2207.14169
Holographic Study of Reflected Entropy in Anisotropic Theories
Mohammad Javad Vasli, M. Reza Mohammadi Mozaffar, Komeil Babaei Velni and Mohammad Sahraei
We evaluate reflected entropy in certain anisotropic boundary theories dual to nonrelativistic geometries using holography. It is proposed that this quantity is proportional to the minimal area of the entanglement wedge cross section. Using this prescription, we study in detail the effect of anisotropy on reflected entropy and other holographic entanglement measures. In particular, we study the discontinuous phase transition of this quantity for a symmetric configuration consisting of two disjoint strips. We find that in the specific regimes of the parameter space the critical separation is an increasing function of the anisotropy parameter and hence the correlation between the subregions becomes more pronounced. We carefully examine how these results are consistent with the behavior of other correlation measures including the mutual information. Finally, we show that the structure of the universal terms of entanglement entropy is corrected depending on the orientation of the entangling region with respect to the anisotropic direction.

2207.14170
Epicyclic frequencies of spheroidal stars with non-uniform density
D. A. Bollimpalli
We consider the gravitational potential of a rotating star with non-uniform density to derive the orbital and epicyclic frequencies of the particles orbiting the star. We assume that the star is composed of concentric spheroids of constant density, with a global power-law distribution of density inside the star. At the lowest order approximation, we recover the known result for the Maclaurin spheroid that the maximum in the radial epicyclic frequency occurs at $r=\sqrt{2}ae$, for eccentricities $\geq 1/\sqrt{2}$. We find that the nature of these characteristic frequencies differs based on the geometry of the rotating star. For an oblate spheroid, the orbits resemble retrograde-Kerr orbits and the location of the radial epicyclic maximum approaches the stellar surface as the density variation inside the star becomes steeper. On the contrary, orbits around a prolate spheroid resemble prograde-Kerr orbits, but the marginally stable orbit does not exist for prolate-shaped stars. The orbital frequency is larger (smaller) than the Keplerian value for an oblate (prolate) star with the equality attained as $e \rightarrow 0$ or $r \rightarrow \infty$. The radial profiles of the angular velocity and the angular momentum allow for a stable accreting disc around any nature of oblate/prolate spheroid.

2207.14193
The Bethe ansatz for a new integrable open quantum system
Marius de Leeuw and Chiara Paletta
In this paper we apply the nested algebraic Bethe ansatz to compute the eigenvalues and the Bethe equations of the transfer matrix of the new integrable Lindbladian found in [1]. We show that it can be written as an integrable spin chain consisting of two interacting XXZ spin chains. We numerically compute the Liouville gap and its dependence on the parameters in the system such as scaling with the system length and interaction strength.

2207.14224
Positivity bounds on effective field theories with spontaneously broken Lorentz invariance
Paolo Creminelli, Oliver Janssen and Leonardo Senatore
We derive positivity bounds on EFT coefficients in theories where boosts are spontaneously broken. We employ the analytic properties of the retarded Green's function of conserved currents (or of the stress-energy tensor) and assume the theory becomes conformal in the UV. The method is general and applicable to both cosmology and condensed matter systems. As a concrete example, we look at the EFT of conformal superfluids which describes the universal low-energy dynamics of CFT's at large chemical potential and we derive inequalities on the coefficients of the operators, in three dimensions, at NLO and NNLO.

2207.14267
No-go Theorem for Scalar-Trispectrum-Induced Gravitational Waves
Sebastian Garcia-Saenz, Lucas Pinol, Sébastien Renaux-Petel and Denis Werth
We show that the contribution of the primordial trispectrum to the energy density of the scalar-induced stochastic gravitational wave background cannot exceed the one from the scalar power spectrum in conventional inflationary scenarios. Specifically, we prove in the context of scale-invariant theories that neither regular trispectrum shapes peaking in so-called equilateral configurations, nor local trispectrum shapes diverging in soft momentum limits, can contribute significantly. Indeed, those contributions are always bound to be smaller than an order-one (or smaller) number multiplying the relative one-loop correction to the scalar power spectrum, necessarily much smaller than unity in order for the theory to be under perturbative control. Since a no-go theorem is only worth its assumptions, we also briefly discuss a toy model for a scale-dependent scalar spectrum, which confirms the robustness of our no-go result.

2207.14271
Root of unity asymptotics for Schur indices of 4d Lagrangian theories
Giorgos Eleftheriou
The Schur index of a $4$ dimensional $\mathcal{N}=2$ superconformal field theory counts (with sign) bosonic and fermionic states that preserve $4$ supercharges. We consider the Schur indices of $4$d $\mathcal{N}=4$ super Yang-Mills and $\mathcal{N}=2$ circular quiver gauge theories with gauge groups $U(N)$ or $SU(N)$. We calculate the exponentially dominant part of their asymptotic expansions as the index parameter $q$ approaches any root of unity. We find that some of the indices exhibit "small" ($O(N^0)$ as $N \rightarrow \infty$) exponential growth, which is much smaller than an $O(N^2)$ exponential growth of states that is indicative of a black hole. This implies that the indices do not capture a growth of states that would correspond to a supersymmetric black hole that preserves 4 supercharges in the holographic dual AdS theory. Interestingly, the exponentially dominant part in the Schur asymptotics we consider, depends on the parity of the rank $N$.

2207.14274
Black Hole as a Bound State of Semi-classical Degrees of Freedom
Yuki Yokokura
A black hole is considered as a bound state of semi-classical degrees of freedom with maximum gravity. For a configuration of those responsible for the area entropy, the information distribution determines the interior metric through the semi-classical Einstein equation. Then, the bound state has no horizon or singularity, and the interior is a continuous stacking of $AdS_2\times S^2$ with a $AdS$ radius close to the Planck length and behaves like a thermal state at a near-Planckian local temperature. Integrating the entropy density over the interior volume reproduces the area law exactly. This indicates that the dynamics of gravity plays an essential role in the change of entropy from the volume law to the area law.

2207.14285
New instabilities for non-supersymmetric AdS$_4$ orientifold vacua
Fernando Marchesano, Joan Quirant and Matteo Zatti
We consider massive type IIA orientifold compactifications of the form AdS$_4 \times X_6$, where $X_6$ admits a Calabi--Yau metric and is threaded by background fluxes. From a 4d viewpoint, fluxes generate a potential whose vacua have been classified, including one $\mathcal{N}=1$ and three perturbatively stable $\mathcal{N}=0$ branches. We reproduce this result from a 10d viewpoint, by solving the type IIA equations at the same level of accuracy as previously done for the $\mathcal{N}=1$ branch. All solutions exhibit localised sources and parametric scale separation. We then analyse the non-perturbative stability of the $\mathcal{N}=0$ branches. We consider new 4d membranes, obtained from wrapping D8-branes on $X_6$ or D6-branes on its divisors, threaded by non-diluted worldvolume fluxes. Using them we show that all branches are compatible with the Weak Gravity Conjecture for membranes. In fact, most vacua satisfy the sharpened conjecture that predicts superextremal membranes in $\mathcal{N}=0$ settings, except for a subset whose non-perturbative stability remains an open problem.

2106.04568
Structure of Kaluza-Klein Graviton Scattering Amplitudes from Gravitational Equivalence Theorem and Double-Copy
Yan-Feng Hang and Hong-Jian He
We study the structure of scattering amplitudes of the Kaluza-Klein (KK) gravitons and of the gravitational KK Goldstone bosons in the compactified 5d General Relativity (GR). We analyze the geometric "Higgs" mechanism for mass-generation of KK gravitons under compactification with a general $R_\xi$ gauge-fixing, which is free from the vDVZ discontinuity. Then, we formulate the Gravitational Equivalence Theorem (GRET) to connect the longitudinal KK graviton amplitudes to the KK Goldstone amplitudes, which is a manifestation of the geometric Higgs mechanism at $S$-matrix level. We directly compute the tree-level KK Goldstone amplitudes which equal the longitudinal KK graviton amplitudes in the high energy limit. We further extend the double-copy method with color-kinematics duality to reconstruct the massive KK longitudinal graviton (Goldstone) amplitudes from the KK longitudinal gauge boson (Goldstone) amplitudes in the compactified 5d Yang-Mills (YM) theory under high energy expansion. From these, we reconstruct the GRET of the KK longitudinal graviton (Goldstone) amplitudes in the 5d GR from the KK longitudinal gauge boson (Goldstone) amplitudes in the 5d YM theory. Using either the GRET or the double-copy reconstruction, we provide a theoretical mechanism showing that the sum of all the energy-power terms [up to $O(E^{10})$] in the high-energy four longitudinal KK graviton amplitudes must cancel down to $O(E^2)$ as enforced by matching the energy-power dependence of the corresponding KK Goldstone amplitudes or by matching that of the double-copy amplitudes from the KK YM theory. With the double-copy approach, we establish a new correspondence between the two energy-cancellations: $E^4 \to E^0$ in the 5d KK YM theory and $E^{10} \to E^2$ in the 5d KK GR theory. We further analyze the structure of the residual terms in the GRET and uncover a new energy-cancellation mechanism therein.

2110.10140
Radiated momentum in the Post-Minkowskian worldline approach via reverse unitarity
Massimiliano Maria Riva and Filippo Vernizzi
We compute the four-momentum radiated during the scattering of two spinless bodies, at leading order in the Newton's contant $G$ and at all orders in the velocities, using the Effective Field Theory worldline approach. Following \cite{Mougiakakos:2021ckm}, we derive the conserved stress-energy tensor linearly coupled to gravity generated by localized sources, at leading and next-to-leading order in $G$, and from that the classical probability amplitude of graviton emission. The total emitted momentum is obtained by phase-space integration of the graviton momentum weighted by the modulo squared of the radiation amplitude. We recast this as a two-loop integral that we solve using techniques borrowed from particle physics, such as reverse unitarity, reduction to master integrals by integration-by-parts identities and canonical differential equations. The emitted momentum agrees with recent results obtained by other methods. Our approach provides an alternative way of directly computing radiated observables in the post-Minkowskian expansion without going through the classical limit of scattering amplitudes.

2111.00473
Divergence Anomaly and Schwinger Terms: Towards a Consistent Theory of Anomalous Classical Fluid
Arpan Krishna Mitra and Subir Ghosh
Anomaly, a generic feature of relativistic quantum field theory, is shown to be present in non-relativistic classical ideal fluid. A new result is the presence of anomalous terms in current algebra, an obvious analogue of Schwinger terms present in quantum field theory. We work in Hamiltonian framework where Eulerian dynamical variables obey an anomalous algebra (with Schwinger terms) that is inherited from modified Poisson brackets, with Berry curvature corrections, among Lagrangian discrete coordinates. The divergence anomaly appears in the Hamiltonian equations of motion. A generalized form of fluid velocity field can be identified with the "anomalous velocity" of Bloch band electrons appearing in quantum Hall effect in condensed matter physics. We finally show that the divergence anomaly and Schwinger terms satisfy well known Adler consistency condition. Lastly we mention possible scenarios where this new anomalous fluid theory can impact.

2112.12118
Introductory Notes on Non-linear Electrodynamics and its Applications
Dmitri P. Sorokin
In 1933-1934 Born and Infeld constructed the first non-linear generalization of Maxwell's electrodynamics that turned out to be a remarkable theory in many respects. In 1935 Heisenberg and Euler computed a complete effective action describing non-linear corrections to Maxwell's theory due to quantum electron-positron one-loop effects. Since then, these and a variety of other models of non-linear electrodynamics proposed in the course of decades have been extensively studied and used in a wide range of areas of theoretical physics including string theory, gravity, cosmology and condensed matter (CMT). In these notes I will overview general properties of non-linear electrodynamics and particular models which are distinguished by their symmetries and physical properties, such as a recently discovered unique non-linear modification of Maxwell's electrodynamics which is conformal and duality invariant. I will also sketch how non-linear electromagnetic effects may manifest themselves in physical phenomena (such as vacuum birefringence), in properties of gravitational objects (e.g. charged black holes) and in the evolution of the universe, and can be used, via gravity/CMT holography, for the description of properties of certain conducting and insulating materials.

2204.06391
Chaotic instability in the BFSS matrix model
Osamu Fukushima and Kentaroh Yoshida
Chaotic scattering is a manifestation of transient chaos realized by the scattering with non-integrable potential. When the initial position is taken in the potential, a particle initially exhibits chaotic motion, but escapes outside after a certain period of time. The time to stay inside the potential can be seen as lifetime and this escape process may be regarded as a kind of instability. The process of this type exists in the Banks-Fischler-Shenker-Susskind (BFSS) matrix model in which the potential has flat directions. We discuss this chaotic instability by reducing the system with an ansatz to a simple dynamical system and present the associated fractal structure. We also show the singular behavior of the time delay function and compute the fractal dimension. This chaotic instability is the basic mechanism by which membranes are unstable, which is also common to supermembranes at quantum level.

2204.07617
Celestial insights into the S-matrix bootstrap
Sudip Ghosh, Prashanth Raman and Aninda Sinha
We consider 2-2 scattering in four spacetime dimensions in Celestial variables. Using the crossing symmetric dispersion relation (CSDR), we recast the Celestial amplitudes in terms of crossing symmetric partial waves. These partial waves have spurious singularities in the complex Celestial variable, which need to be removed in local theories. The locality constraints (null constraints) admit closed form expressions, which lead to novel bounds on partial wave moments. These bounds allow us to quantify the degree of low spin dominance(LSD) for scalar theories. We study a new kind of positivity that seems to be present in a wide class of theories. We prove that this positivity arises only in theories with a spin-0 dominance. The crossing symmetric partial waves with spurious singularities removed, dubbed as Feynman blocks, have remarkable properties in the Celestial variable, namely typically realness, in the sense of Geometric Function Theory (GFT). Using GFT techniques we derive non-projective bounds on Wilson coefficients in terms of partial wave moments.

2204.08290
Effective reflected entropy and entanglement negativity for general 2D eternal black holes
Jiong Lin and Yizhou Lu
Both reflected entropy and entanglement negativity provide valid measures of entanglement between subsystems of a mixed state. For general 2D eternal black holes coupled with CFT matters in large $c$ limit, we perform the replica-trick computation and find that both effective Renyi reflected entropy and effective entanglement negativity can be expressed in terms of the combination of modified backreacting cosmic branes in $\mathrm{AdS}_3$ bulk. We then develop a holographic scheme to calculate effective reflected entropy and entanglement negativity for general 2D eternal black holes coupled with CFT matters in large $c$ limit. Using the scheme, we check the consistency condition of the island formulae for entanglement negativity and reflected entropy. We find that the combinations of modified backreacting cosmic branes in $\mathrm{AdS}_3$ bulk from the two island proposals of entanglement negativity exactly match with each other. Finally, we study the saturation of the reflected entropy inequality.

2205.00603
Formation of primordial black holes after Starobinsky inflation
Daniel Frolovsky, Sergei V. Ketov and Sultan Saburov
We adapted the Appleby-Battye-Starobinsky model of $F(R)$ gravity towards describing double cosmological inflation and formation of primordial black holes with masses up to $10^{19}$ g in the single-field model. We found that it is possible to get an enhancement of the power spectrum of scalar curvature perturbations to the level beyond the Hawking (black hole evaporation) limit of $10^{15}$ g, so that the primordial black holes resulting from gravitational collapse of those large primordial perturbations can survive in the present universe and form part of cold dark matter. Our results agree with the current measurements of cosmic microwave background radiation within $3\sigma$ but require fine-tuning of the parameters.

2205.01885
Holographic Schwinger effect and electric instability with anisotropy
Si-wen Li, Sen-kai Luo and Hao-qian Li
According to the gauge-gravity duality, we systematically study the Schwinger effect and electric instability with anisotropy in a top-down holographic approach. The anisotropic black brane and bubble (soliton) background in IIB supergravity are employed and the dual theories in these backgrounds are expected to be anisotropic theory at finite temperature and anisotropic theory with confinement respectively. Then performing the potential analysis, we find due to the anisotropy, the potential barrier behaves oppositely with parallel and perpendicular electric fields, and this behavior agrees with the previous study about the quark potential with anisotropy in this system. Afterwards, we evaluate the pair production rate by solving the equation of motion for a fundamental string numerically which reveals the consistent behavior with the potential analysis. Furthermore, the probe D7-brane as flavor is introduced into the bulk in order to investigate the electric instability. The vacuum decay rate can be obtained by evaluating the imaginary part of the D7-brane action which again agrees with our potential analysis. Solving the associated constraint of gauge field strength on the flavor brane, we finally obtain the V-A curve displaying the distinct behavior of the conductivity in parallel and perpendicular direction which is in agreement with some bottom-up and phenomenologically holographic approaches in anisotropic fluid. Accordingly, we believe this work may be remarkable to study the electric features in strongly coupled anisotropic system.

2205.02478
Towards hybrid inflation with $n_s=1$ in light of Hubble tension and primordial gravitational waves
Gen Ye, Jun-Qian Jiang and Yun-Song Piao
Recently, it has been found that complete resolution of the Hubble tension might point to a scale-invariant Harrison-Zeldovich spectrum of primordial scalar perturbation, i.e. $n_s=1$ for $H_0\sim 73$km/s/Mpc. We show that for well-known slow-roll models, if inflation ends by a waterfall instability with respect to another field in the field space while inflaton is still at a deep slow-roll region, $n_s$ can be lifted to $n_s= 1$. A surprise of our result is that with pre-recombination early dark energy, chaotic $\phi^2$ inflation, ruled out by Planck+BICEP/Keck in standard $\Lambda$CDM, can be revived, which is now well within testable region of upcoming cosmic microwave background B-mode experiments.

2206.10427
Logarithmic Corrections, Entanglement Entropy, and UV Cutoffs in de Sitter Spacetime
Gabriel Arenas-Henriquez, Felipe Diaz and Per Sundell
It has been argued that the entropy of de Sitter space corresponds to the entanglement between disconnected regions computable by switching on a replica parameter $q$ modeled by the quotient dS$/\mathbb{Z}_q$. Within this framework, we show that the centrally-extended asymptotic symmetry algebra near the cosmic horizon is a single copy of the Virasoro algebra. The resulting density of states matches the semi-classical result of Gibbons and Hawking up to an undetermined constant that is chosen to reproduce the entanglement entropy previously found in the literature. It follows that the logarithmic quantum corrections to the Cardy entropy reproduces the known one-loop result computed in the bulk in the presence of a cutoff. The resulting entanglement entropy follows the divergent area law, where the UV cutoff is now a function of the replica parameter. Thus, as the near-horizon CFT fixes the cutoff in units of the Planck scale, the model can be viewed as a probe into whether the defect Hilbert space has a finite dimension; indeed, the limit $q\to 0$, reproduces Banks' formula. We also study the quantum corrections of the effective description of the horizon entropy by means of Liouville field theory, where the large $q$ limit corresponds to a realization of dS$_3$/CFT$_2$ correspondence matching the logarithmic corrections to three-dimensional de Sitter space obtained by computing the one-loop contribution to the quantum gravity partition function in the round three-sphere.

2206.12155
Circuits of space-time quantum channels
Pavel Kos and Georgios Styliaris
Exact solutions in interacting many-body systems are scarce and very valuable since they provide crucial insights into the dynamics. This is true for both closed and open quantum systems. Recently introduced dual-unitary models are one example where this is possible. These brick-wall quantum circuits consist of local gates, which are unitary in both time and space directions. In this work we generalise these ideas to obtain exact solutions in open quantum circuits, where each gate is substituted by a local quantum channel. Exact solutions are enabled by demanding additional unitality directions for local quantum channels. That is, local channels preserve the identity operator also in (at least one) space direction. We introduce new families of models, which obey different combinations of unitality conditions, and study their structure. Moreover, we prove that any 4-way unital channel can be written as an affine combination of a particular class of dual-unitary gates. Next, we use these families to provide exact solutions of spatio-temporal correlation functions, spatial correlations after a quantum quench, and study their steady states. For solvable quenches, we define initial solvable matrix product density operators (MPDO). In addition, we prove that solvable MPDO in the local purification form are in one-to-one correspondence with quantum channels.

2206.13451
Causality constraints on nonlinear supersymmetry
Quentin Bonnefoy, Gabriele Casagrande and Emilian Dudas
It is well-known that gravitino propagation in standard supergravities is free of any causality problems. However, two issues related to gravitino propagation were recently uncovered in specific supergravities with nonlinear supersymmetry. One of them concerns potential acausality/superluminality, whereas the second one arises from the vanishing of the sound speed at specific points during inflation. The former is famously related to positivity constraints on specific EFT operators, derived from dispersion relations on the energy-growing part of scattering amplitudes, and indeed we show that subluminality constraints for the gravitino are related via the equivalence theorem to positivity bounds in low-energy goldstino actions. However, the former are stronger, in the sense that they apply to functions of the scalar fields not only in the ground state, but for any field values such as those scanned by time-dependent solutions, unlike bounds derived from $2\to 2$ scattering amplitudes in the vacuum. We also argue that nontrivial causality constraints arise only in the case where nonlinear supersymmetry in the matter sector is encoded into superfield constraints which do not seem to arise from microscopic two-derivative lagrangians, in particular for the orthogonal constraint used to build minimal models of inflation in supergravity. This allows us to propose simple alternatives which maintain the minimality of the spectra and are causal in all points of the theory parameter space. We also discuss minimal supergravity models of inflation along these lines.

2207.09961
Quasi-normal modes for the D3-branes and Exact WKB analysis
Keita Imaizumi
We demonstrate how the Exact WKB analysis works in the study of the quasi-normal modes (QNMs). We apply the Exact WKB analysis to a massless scalar perturbation to the D3-brane metric as a concrete example. The Exact WKB analysis provides an exact condition for the QNMs. We numerically check our exact condition by using the Borel-Pad\'{e} approximation. We also present an analytic form and an asymptotic behavior of the QNMs.

2207.11499
Open Topological String Amplitudes and BPS Invariants on Complete Intersection Calabi-Yau Threefolds
Xuan Li, Yuan-Chun Jing and Fu-Zhong Yang
Open topological string partition function on compact Calabi-Yau threefolds satisfies the extended holomorphic anomaly equation. By direct integration, we solve these equations and obtain partition functions for first several genus and boundaries on complete intersection Calabi-Yau threefolds. Complemented by the unoriented worldsheet contribution, the annulus functions encode the genus one BPS invariants.

2207.11501
Open Topological String Amplitudes on Calabi-Yau Threefolds by Extended Holomorphic Anoamly Equation
Xuan Li, Yuan-Chun Jing and Fu-Zhong Yang
In this paper, we study the open topological string amplitudes on Calabi-Yau threefolds by the extended holomorphic anomaly equation. The disk two-point function determined by the domainwall tension, together with the Yukawa couplings, solves the amplitudes with high genus and boundaries recursively. The BPS invariants encoded in the amplitudes are extracted by mirror symmetry.

2207.11780
Yano F structures and extended Supersymmetry
Ulf Lindström
It is shown how extended supersymmetry realised directly on the (2,2) semichiral superfields of a symplectic sigma model gives rise to a geometry on the doubled tangent bundle consisting of two Yano F structures on an almost para-hermitian manifold. Closure of the algebra and invariance of the action is discussed in this framework and integrability of the F structures is defined and shown to hold. The reduction to the usual (1, 1) sigma model description and identification with the bi-quaternionic set of complex structures and their properties is elucidated. The F structure formulation should be applicable to many other models and will have an equivalent formulation in Generalised Geometry.

2207.11980
Onset of Quantum Chaos in Random Field Theories
Micha Berkooz, Adar Sharon, Navot Silberstein and Erez Y. Urbach
We study the quantum Lyapunov exponent $\lambda_L$ in theories with spacetime-independent disorder. We first derive self-consistency equations for the two- and four-point functions for products of $N$ models coupled by disorder at large $N$, generalizing the equations appearing in SYK-like models. We then study families of theories in which the disorder coupling is an exactly marginal deformation, allowing us to follow $\lambda_L$ from weak to strong coupling. We find interesting behaviors, including a discontinuous transition into chaos, mimicking classical KAM theory.

2207.13157
Entangled Quantum States of Causal Fermion Systems and Unitary Group Integrals
Felix Finster, Niky Kamran and Moritz Reintjes
This paper is dedicated to a detailed analysis and computation of quantum states of causal fermion systems. The mathematical core is to compute integrals over the unitary group asymptotically for a large dimension of the group, for various integrands with a specific scaling behavior in this dimension. It is shown that, in a well-defined limiting case, the localized refined pre-state is positive and allows for the description of general entangled states.